feat: add notes on deployment of participant agents (#15)
eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base/dsp_best_practices: deployment/README.md

# Best Practices on deploying DSP-Endpoints

Participants usually require their endpoints to be protected and publicly reachable. Clients (usually

> Consumers) have an interest to automatically discover DSP-endpoints and infer knowledge about their expected behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consumers) have an interest in automatically discovering DSP-endpoints and inferring knowledge about their expected behavior.
```

For this, the metadata endpoint is particularly relevant because it hints to the Consumer what version of the DSP and
profiles to expect allowing the Consumer to terminate the interaction early.

> Deployment of endpoints is a detail that is at the discretion of each participant. The DSP-spec accounts for this with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Endpoint deployment is a detail that is left to the discretion of each participant. The DSP-spec accounts for this with
```

   own callback endpoints. Examples are the `ContractRequestMessage`'s `callbackAddress` property and the `endpointURL`
   the `Dataset`.
2. The `version` endpoint is bound to the root of the domain as per RFC8615. This is very much unlike the other DSP
   endpoints that are allowed to contain arbitrary URL-segments (both for the `<base>` and `/:callback` endpoints).

## Scenarios

### Scenario 1: Participant has single Agent serving single version

In this case, the subprotocols' endpoints (Catalog Protocol, Contract Negotiation Protocol, Transfer Process Protocol)
are all served from the same `<base>`. The component implementing the endpoints is self-contained and only needs its own
`<base>` as input to construct the `endpointURL` and `callbackAddress`. The metadata document can be hosted if the
application exposing the DSP-endpoint is deployed with direct access to the domain.

*`domain/.well-known/dspace-version` serving directions to the single DSP base endpoint.*

```json
{
  "protocolVersions": [
    {
      "version": "2025-1",
      "path": "/arbitrary/difference/between/domain/and/2025-1/endpoint/",
      "binding": "HTTPS"
    }
  ]
}
```

> If the `CatalogService` is registered in the did document, the `service` entry looks like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `CatalogService` is registered in the DID document, the `service` entry looks like
```

```json
{
  "@context": [
    "https://w3id.org/dspace/2025/1/context.jsonld",
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
  ],
  "id": "some:id",
  "type": "CatalogService",
  "serviceEndpoint": "https://<base>/catalog"
}
```

### Scenario 2: Participant has single Agent serving multiple versions

This scenario is similar to [scenario 1](#scenario-1-participant-has-single-agent-serving-single-version) with the

> difference that two entries are returned to two separate `<base>` URLs - one for each protocol version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
difference that two entries are returned with two separate `<base>` URLs - one for each protocol version.
```

- `domain/.well-known/dspace-version` serving directions to navigate to endpoints for specific versions.

```json
{
  "protocolVersions": [
    {
      "version": "2025-1",
      "path": "/arbitrary/difference/between/domain/and/2025-1/endpoint/",
      "binding": "HTTPS"
    },
    {
      "version": "2024-1",
      "path": "/arbitrary/difference/between/domain/and/2024-1/endpoint/",
      "binding": "HTTPS"
    }
  ]
}
```

> If the `CatalogService` is registered in the did document, the `service` entry still looks like in scenario 1. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `CatalogService` is registered in the DID document, the `service` entry still looks like in scenario 1. The
```

The returned version endpoint information would be:

```json
{
  "protocolVersions": [
    {
      "version": "2025-1",
      "path": "/arbitrary/difference/between/domain/and/2025-1/endpoint/",
      "binding": "HTTPS"
    }
  ]
}
```

indicating paths that are relative to the domain of the URL this payload was served by. A client will assume that the
`2025-1` endpoint is available at `https://gateway.mycorp.com/arbitrary/difference/between/domain/and/2025-1/endpoint/`
which would be unavailable as the DSP-endpoints are registered with a first segment `dsp-participant-agent`. So
configuring an additional redirect rule (see rule 3) is not enough but **has to be** accompanied by making the connector
deployment aware of its location on the proxy. It has to be aware of that anyway because of the `callbackAddress`
properties that are part of the Contract Negotiation and Transfer Process Protocols. This would change the version info
like this:

```json
{
  "protocolVersions": [
    {
      "version": "2025-1",
      "path": "dsp-participant-agent/arbitrary/difference/between/domain/and/2025-1/endpoint/",
      "binding": "HTTPS"
    }
  ]
}
```

> In that case, the did doc would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, the DID doc would be
```
